---
title: 'A Most Intense Debugging Experience'
date: '2025-06-26'
updated: '2025-06-26'
draft: true
tags: ['Career']
featuredImage: blog/career-debugging-nightmare.jpeg
summary: >
  I'd been contracting with the company for 3 weeks. Production had an issue, and I was asked to
  help.
---

## The Setup

I'd been contracting with the company for 3 weeks.

My onboarding was a bit rough. I was tasked with developing an API middleware to help bridge the gap
between the company's legacy system and a newer medical billing platform. The principal engineer
leading the project had set me up with a separate barebones git repository to work in, which didn't
have any of the actual product's code. We paired and reviewed for a couple of sessions initially,
but he became busy with other work and I was left to my own devices.

With this time, I made some headway on the API setup, but with minimal details on the implementation
needs, and no working knowledge or understanding of the product's codebase, there wasn't a whole lot
I could do.

I began exploring other repositories, and studied the primary product's codebase. I took it upon
myself to attempt to spin it up and I ran into numerous issues along the way - mainly due to
outdated documentation and system incompatibilites. With some time and effort, I was able to get it
running, but I was still missing a lot of the details.

All this to say that I was left with a lot of questions, and there wasn't much communication from
the lead engineer.

## The Call

One day, I was plugging along, exploring the codebase and learning about the product. I received a
Zoom call from the Product Manager. He mentioned that they were having some issues with the app, and
was wondering if I could help to debug it. He mentioned that the Lead Engineer was out of the
office, so they're checking in with me to see if I could help.

"Sure!" I said. I like to help out, and this seemed like a good opportunity to get to know the
product better.

At first, I thought it might be a simple issue, nothing too serious. I thought perhaps they were
giving me a chance to learn more as well as to understand how I approach problems.

I quickly realized that this was not the case.

Soon, the Chief Technology Officer joined the call. Then the Chief Operating Officer. Then others...
people I hadn't really met yet.

I learned that the issue was that users were unable to login.

At that point in time, I wasn't too familiar with the company's user base. I didn't know how many
users were struggling to sign in, and I didn't know how many companies or businesses that the issue
impacted. I honestly didn't want to know.

A big part of staying calm and collected in these situations is to not let the situation get to you.
Whether the bug or issue is affecting one customer, one thousand, or one million, the root cause is
the same.

I was able to help them debug the issue, and we were able to get the users back up and running...
but wow, what an experience!

## The Debugging

To debug, I was told where the login page was located in the repository, so I could start there. I
was guided to a line in the mid-500s where the Product Manager thought the issue might be ocurring.

I began by adding some server-side logs to see if I could get any more information. I checked out a
hotfix branch, committed the log statements and pushed, and the Product Manager was able to deploy
this branch to a specific environment for testing. Thank goodness he was able to do that, because I
was so fresh in the system that there was no way I'd be deploying anything!

After deploying, the CTO was able to see the logs on production (which I didn't have access to yet),
and would paste the log results into our Zoom chat.

I realized we weren't seeing anything meaningful, and most of the logs weren't even showing up, so
the problem must be higher up in the file.

I added more logs starting at the very beginning of the file, and we deployed again.

There! Data. We started to see some details.

The login page itself was lacking in error handling, and there were some linear queries that were
being made to the database when the page loads and users attempt to log in.

One of the log results after a query showed us that the query was returning an empty result set for
a specific field... this empty set wasn't accounted for via error handling, and an empty value broke
everything down the line!

The COO was able to pinpoint the specific data issue in the database, and we were able to fix it.

Voila!

Overall, this process took about an hour. It was intense, there was about a dozen people on the call
at one point... but my blinders were on. I was focused on the code, getting answers, and finding a
fix.

## The Aftermath

After the fix, I was able to get a better understanding of the codebase, and I learned more about
the actual impact of the outage that I helped troubleshoot. Apparently, this issue was a major one,
and the company was grateful for my help.

I found out the next day that the reason the Lead Engineer was out of the office was because he quit
without notice after over a decade with the company.

The next chapter is to be written...
